---
title: Essay 2
layout: about
permalink: /essay-02.html
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Conclusion;Notes" %}

# How Wartime Changed America's Political Landscape





## Introduction

War has always been a part of our history since we won our independence from Great Britain in 1776. While war has been rich in our history, it wasn't until the start of the 20th century that America would be forever changed by wartime. While there had been many different battles on domestic soil, such as the Civil War, America had never participated in any war overseas until the beginning of WWI and, eventually, WWII. No one could have predicted how the events of WWI and WWII would impact America in the years to come. WWI, also known as The Great War, was the first major global war that occurred in recent history involving the Central powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Turkey) against the Allied Powers (France, Great Britain, Russia, Italy, Japan, and the United States). Not long after the conclusion of WWI, WWII began roughly 20 short years after, pitting the Axis Powers (Germany, Italy, and Japan) against the Allies (France, Great Britain, the United States, and the Soviet Union). With both of the world wars coming seemingly one after the other, many Americans struggled with their domestic lives while soldiers were overseas fighting. Ever since the conclusion of WWII, the political landscape of America has shifted to focus more on militaristic ideas and innovative ways that we can protect our country going forward. Wartime has also affected how Americans see its leaders and how it factors into their decisions on who should run the country. America has always done a good job of electing someone who can run the country at a high level with the country's best interests in mind. This multimedia essay aims to highlight the different struggles that American’s had to go through as well as, with America's implications in two world wars, how the political landscape of America was forever changed and influenced people's political views to this day. 


## The Great War

{% include feature/image.html filename="Start of WWI 1914.jpg" alt="Germany Declares War" %}
This newspaper clip was published in America in 1914, highlighting the beginning of WWI when Germany declared war on Belgium. Although the U.S. was not involved at the time, the Great War was followed very closely in America until our eventual involvement in 1917.

The Great War, commonly referred to as WWI, lasted from 1914-1918. The war started with the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand of Austria on June 28th, 1914. Austria-Hungary would soon declare war on Serbia, launching the world into its first world war. The most notable countries involved in this war were Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, and the United States. Much of the fighting that occurred in this war, as well as WWII, happened in Europe with no battles occurring in the U.S. at any point in time. At the beginning of the war, the United States had mostly followed an isolationist political view when it came to our involvement in other country's affairs. Isolationism can be defined as remaining apart from the affairs or interests of other countries. Since its secession from Great Britain in 1776, America has not had to deal with many foreign affairs around the world.  While Americans had held this political view for many years, as the war endured, many Americans had started to move away from the Isolationist view and move toward a more interventionist political view. Even so, President Woodrow Wilson was reluctant to join the war, despite many Americans believing that we should intervene. Wilson was afraid of the different implications that could occur should the United States enter the war and how the world would see the U.S. as a global power in the future. The U.S. would not enter the war until 1917, amid finding out that Germany was encouraging Mexico to attack the United States. The amount of support to enter the war after the discovery of this message was overwhelming, which would eventually force the hands of Wilson and Congress to enter the war against the Central Powers. Woodrow Wilson declared war on Germany and the other central powers on April 6th, 1917. When the U.S. entered the war, many Americans started to believe a new political view of 'Wilsonianism.' The Wilsonianism point of view is the belief that "the growth of democracy abroad makes the United States more secure at home" [^1]. President Wilson thought that by encouraging/influencing other counties around the world to practice democracy, then they would be less likely to have conflict with those countries in the future. However, the U.S. would not actively try to spread Capitalism and Democracy to other countries until the conclusion of WWII and the beginning of the Cold War against the Soviet Union. With the United States entering the war, they provided much needed reinforcements to the Allies that would eventually help them win the war. While the fighting may have stopped in the year of 1918, the war would not be officially considered over until June 28th, 1919, with the signing of the Treaty of Versailles, exactly 5 years after the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand kickstarted the war between Austria-Hungary and Serbia. While many were relieved that the war had ended, America’s hardships had only just begun.


## Fallout from The Great War

With the ending of the Great War, America was able to endure a decade of economic prosperity and success during the 1920s, also known as the Roaring Twenties. Women were able to gain suffrage, the stock market was thriving, and the economy in the United States had never been better. With that success also came different struggles for the American people. One of the main concerns after the end of The Great War was the beginning of the Red Scare. The Red Scare can be defined as hysteria over the perceived threat posed by Communists in the U.S. Many people were unsettled with the formation of the Soviet Union after WWI and feared that their ideals would spread across the world and create a global Communist Revolution. [^2] The Red Scare first began to take over the U.S. on January 21st, 1919, with “35,000 Seattle shipyard workers, dealing with rising prices and a housing shortage, struck.” [^1] Two weeks after, 60,000 more workers went on strike. In response to this, Seattle mayor Ole Hanson labeled the strikers as ‘red revolutionists’ and was able to break the strike in four days. Many newspapers would publish stories nationally stating that Communists had infiltrated Seattle and would begin to spread their ideas across the nation. While many were concerned about the events occurring in Seattle, it was not until April 28th when a bomb arrived by mail at Mayor Hanson’s office in Seattle that the Red Scare would take the nation by storm. The bomb would explode the day after it was delivered at the home of an anti-immigration senator, which injured the secretary who had opened the package. Following the explosion of the bomb, mail inspectors found 34 subsequent bombs scattered across the country, including one that was addressed to the Attorney General at the time. These bombings would continue, with explosions going off in eight different cities, killing two. Communists were not involved in these explosions, however, which were claimed to have been orchestrated by Italian-born anarchists under the leadership of Luigi Galleani. Despite of this, Attorney General Palmer placed blame on the Communists, arresting “thousands of Communists were being arrested across the United States.” [^1] He would continue to cause unrest in the U.S. and advocated that Communists were all across the nation. Palmer also thought that African-Americans were more susceptible to communist recruitment, which made them a target during a time when they did not have many civil rights. This would not be the only struggle that African-Americans had once the war ended. As stated previously, many African-Americans were fighting for their civil liberties once they returned from the battlefield, “echoing Du Bois’s vow to win civil rights at home: ‘We return. We return from fighting. We return fighting. Make way for democracy!’” [^1] Chief among their struggles was the creation of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), which was created in response to the rising tide of color. Along with discriminating against African-Americans, the KKK also incorporated anti-Semitism and anti-Catholicism into their practices as well. The main goal of the KKK was to strip political, moral, and civic power from African-Americans, Catholics, Jews, and recent immigrants. [^7]  By the end of 1923, the KKK had garnered over four million members nationwide, as well as creating small cells in Canada, Mexico, and New Zealand to discourage immigration to the U.S. By 1930, however, membership had dwindled to just around 30,000 people due to a scandal involving Indiana’s Grand Dragon Stephenson, though hatred would still be present throughout the Great Depression. The Great Depression began with the stock market crash of 1929, with the Dow losing 39% of its value by November 13th. This was not the only contributor to the Great Depression as income had been slowly declining among railroading, coal mining, and textiles while their stock prices remained high. Farm prices fell as far as 60% during the 1920s at a time when almost 20% of Americans worked in agriculture. The Great Depression did only affect the U.S. with many countries around the world going through a recession. Hoover, who was President for the first half of the Great Depression, held the belief that “the Depression had resulted from the chaotic effects of the Great War…” The war expended many country’s resources, particularly in/around Europe. Europe, Britain, France, and Germany had trouble paying their various debts that they owed to other countries because of the Treaty of Versailles, which hurt Germany the most. Many of these countries, including the U.S., would continue to struggle until the beginning of the second World War. 

{% include feature/image.html filename="Great Depression.jpg" alt="Unemployment Line" %}
This photo was taken during the Great Depression, showcasing a line of unemployed persons receiving food and water from government supported stores across the country.


## WWII

Much like in WWI, Americans were very hesitant to get involved in another war overseas. While many were concerned about the aggressive, fascist ideals that were spreading across Europe and Japan, many were worried that the American economy could not withstand becoming intertwined with these issues. Regardless of what the American people wanted, President Roosevelt began preparations to defend America, bolstering its defenses. The war would not officially begin until September of 1939, when Hitler and his forces invaded Poland, forcing Great Britain and France to declare war on them. For three years, America was able to remain neutral in the war up until the bombing of Pearl Harbor. The bombing, orchestrated by the Japanese, commenced on December 7th, 1941. The attack killed 2,403 U.S. personnel, including 68 civilians, and destroyed 8 battleships. 

{% include feature/pdf.html filename="Pearl Harbor Document.pdf" %}
This PDF document offers many different facts about the attack on Pearl Harbor, and even includes a news clipping of the aftermath of the attack.

While this was a huge blow to the United States, this event was able to unite the American people like never before. While many different battleships were destroyed, Japan failed to destroy America’s the islands repair facilities or its oil reserves. One day after the attack, President Roosevelt delivered the famous ‘Day of Infamy Speech’ and declared war on Japan and the Axis powers. In response, on December 11th, both Germany and Italy declared war on the United States. The United States entering the war created two different warfronts: the European warfront and the Pacific warfront. America entering the war also helped to improve their suffering economy from recent years. With war mobilization at an all time high, labor mobility improved as well. People who had never had a wage-earning job were able to find jobs at an astounding rate. Many people relocated for higher pay, working in California and Michigan to help the war effort by building machinery to help the soldiers who were overseas. With so many men going overseas to fight, there was a significant increase of women in the workplace from 1942-1945, with around seven million women working directly in defense industries. Women began to abandon low-paying, domestic, temporary, or season jobs for full-time, well-paid, permanent jobs that carried much more responsibility. Women worked in almost every job that men did prior to the start of the war, with some 350,000 women, including 6,500 black women, joining the armed forces. 

{% include feature/image.html filename="Riveter.jpg" alt="Wartime Propaganda" link="https://www.nationalww2museum.org/war/articles/wwii-propaganda" %}
This ad from the 1940s shows Rosie the Riveter, a female icon who was a sybmol of strength for women during WWII, stating that whatever men could do, women could do it as well, if not better.

With so many jobs being created during wartime, the economy slowly began to recover. Much of the wealth in America had begun to redistribute to the working middle class, with farm income doubling during the war and corporate profits rising by 70%. While many in America were experiencing prosperity on domestic soil, African-Americans were still fighting for their civil rights. Many African-Americans believed that they were fighting two wars simultaneously, struggling to gain the basic rights and liberties that come with being an American citizen. They struggled to comprehend how they could justify fighting in a war on behalf of the United States when the country itself did not accept them. It was also a struggle for Japanese-Americans who were already living in the United States before the attack on Pearl Harbor. Many held great prejudice towards Japanese-Americans during the war and for some time after, worrying that they would show greater loyalty to their birth country rather than the country they currently lived. In response to this, Roosevelt created Internment camps, where about 120,000 people of Japanese descent were forcibly relocated to concentration camps, mainly along the Pacific coast [^3]. At the same time, in the summer of 1942, British intelligence intercepted information about Hitlers’ plan to exterminate the Jews in special concentration camps. By the end of that year, there were six known camps in use across Europe which resulted in the death of around two million Polish Jews. This mass extermination of Jews would go on to be coined the Holocaust, “Nazi Germany’s deliberate, organized, state-sponsored persecution and machinelike murder of approximately six million European Jews...” [^4]. While many Americans saw this genocide as inhuman and wrong, they were still actively discriminating against Japanese and African-Americans who lived within the U.S. It would not be until the end of WWII with the Civil Rights Movement that racism and appropriation would be truly challenged in the U.S. The war would begin to come to an end in 1944, when the allied forces stormed the beaches of Normandy in what would eventually be called D-Day. It was an unprecedented invasion that saw 57,000 Americans and 71,215 British soldiers arriving at the beach in six battleships. Upon landing in Normandy, Allied forces were able to fight their way through France from the West, as well as through the South. Germany would eventually be pushed back to their own country from all directions. The war in Europe came to an end shortly after the death of FDR in 1945. Italian partisans had found Mussolini hiding in a railcar and shot him, while Hitler shot himself in a German bunker on April 30th, 1945. The German Supreme command signed a document of unconditional surrender on May 7th, 1945, which meant all Allied resources would be focused towards ending the war in the Pacific. The Allied forces in the Pacific continued to hop from island to island from 1943-1944, never making much headway in pushing into the Japanese home islands. While the Allies began to make headway in 1944 and 1945, the predicted loss of American casualties was too much for Truman to want to continue the invasion. Truman’s solution to this was the Manhattan Project, which was started by FDR at the start of the war and based in New Mexico. The Manhattan Project was created in response to reports that Germany was building a ‘secret bomb’ that could decimate any city that it detonated in. By August of 1945, the Manhattan Project had produced three atomic bombs, which was previously thought to be impossible. Truman and the other Allies offered Japan a Potsdam Ultimatum, asking for their unconditional surrender to avoid “prompt and utter destruction.” Japan refused, so Truman authorized the dropping of the first atomic bomb on August 6th, 1945, in the city of Hiroshima and, three days later, on the city of Nagasaki. In total, over 150,000 people died in Hiroshima and 80,000 in Nagasaki, most of them being civilians [^5]. Japan would agree to surrender so long as their Emperor could remain in place. With the war in the Pacific now over, many Americans rejoiced at the end of the worst war in global history. 


## Life After WWII

{% include feature/image.html filename="Japan Surrenders.jpg" alt="Japan Surrenders" %}
This newspaper clipping is from the end of WWII when Japan surrendered and the news first reached America. 

The end of the second world war brought economic prosperity to America and to its people. The gross domestic product increased by 4.8% during Truman’s last four years in office, unemployment rate fell to an all time low of 2.9%, America was producing more than half of the world’s manufactured goods by the end of the 1940s, as well as producing two thirds of the world’s oil and more than half of the world’s steel. While this was a great time for many Americans, not everyone enjoyed the same postwar prosperity. Many African-Americans lost their jobs after the war ended in favor of the white man. This would come to a head during the 1960s Civil Rights movement and the signing of the Civil Rights Act in 1964, which “prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin” [^6]. America, following the end of WWII, was much more involved in foreign affairs than ever before. After becoming a global superpower Americans felt that they needed to share their prosperity and ideals with the rest of the world. Much of their involvement in foreign affairs post WWII can be explained by the Cold War. The Cold War was a battle of idea between the United States and the Soviet Union, each trying to spread their ideals to less developed countries across the world. The spread of communism vs. the spread of democracy. Many notable events that occurred during the Cold War include the Korean War, the Cuban Missile Crisis, and the Vietnam War to name a few. Since the end of the war in the Pacific, America has continued to grow in both military and industrial power and remains a global superpower to this day. At the beginning of WWI, America was hesitant to get involved in foreign affairs for fear of war, but by the end of WWII, America changed to hold an interventionist political view and vowed to help less developed countries around the world and share with them the success of democracy. While these two world wars were devastating, they helped change America’s political views over the course of 50 years that shaped the United States that we live in today. 


{% include feature/line-chart.html data="sotu-20th-century" topic="America as world power" %}
This line chart shows how, following the end of WWII, President's began referring to America as a world superpower more often as compared to the before either of the world wars took place.


{% include feature/line-chart.html data="sotu-20th-century" topic="America at war" %} 
This graph shows a very good demonstration of how often wartime was mentionded during State of the Union Addresses from 1900-2000. As you can see, after WWI and WWII, many Presidents would consistently use the term 'war' more on average after the conclusion of the wars compared to before the wars took place.



## Notes
[^1]: Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore and Thomas J. Sugrue, These United States: A Nation in the Making (New York and London: W. W. Norton & Company Inc., 2016).

[^2]: Mukherji, S. A. (2017). Reds Among the Sewer Socialists and McCarthyites: The Communist Party in Milwaukee. American Communist History, 16(3/4), 112–142.

[^3]: “Japanese-American Incarceration During WWII,” National Archives, accessed May 4th, 2022, https://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/japanese-relocation. 

[^4]: “The Holocaust,” National WWII Museum, accessed May 3rd, 2022, https://www.nationalww2museum.org/war/articles/holocaust.

[^5]: “Bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki,” History.com, accessed May 3rd, 2022, https://www.history.com/topics/world-war-ii/bombing-of-hiroshima-and-nagasaki.

[^6]: “The Civil Rights Act of 1964,” U.S. Department of Labor, accessed May 5th, 2022, https://www.dol.gov/agencies/oasam/civil-rights-center/statutes/civil-rights-act-of-1964#:~:text=The%20Civil%20Rights%20Act%20of%201964%20prohibits%20discrimination%20on%20the,hiring%2C%20promoting%2C%20and%20firing. 

[^7]: Ford, N. G. (2011). Ethnicity, Race, and the Great War: Exploring an Underexplored Topic. Journal of American Ethnic History, 30(3), 62–70.
